[Unknown]: Welcome to the IVM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: I had a bad dream the other night. I dreamed that I was in the middle of the Sahara desert all alone, dressed in rags, incredibly thirsty.
[Amit Varma]: When the dream began, I was aware that I had been walking in the desert for three days now without food and water.
[Amit Varma]: I was on the verge of collapse. Just then, in the distance, I saw a Coca-Cola stand.
[Amit Varma]: What a miracle! Could it be a mirage?
[Amit Varma]: I ran towards the Coca-Cola stand, stumbling twice in my hurry, fumbling over the sand dune that came in the way.
[Amit Varma]: And when I got there, I saw that behind the counter, there was a guy who looked just like Vijay Mallya, wearing a red cap and dark glasses.
[Amit Varma]: I asked him, can I have a can of Coke, please?
[Amit Varma]: Sure, he said, but you have to pay for it.
[Amit Varma]: I nodded. I had a hundred bucks in my pocket.
[Amit Varma]: How much is it, I asked.
[Amit Varma]: It's ten thousand rupees, he said.
[Amit Varma]: What? I shouted at him. I didn't have so much money. How can you charge me so much money?
[Amit Varma]: Isn't there a maximum retail price?
[Amit Varma]: He just looked at me and laughed.
[Amit Varma]: No, there isn't, you fool, he said to me.
[Amit Varma]: Who told you to dream about the Sahara desert? We are not in India right now, so no MRP.
[Amit Varma]: He started laughing, and that's when I woke up.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. I'm your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: And for you, my dear viewers, the MRP of this show is zero.
[Amit Varma]: MRP, as all my Indian listeners would know, stands for Maximum Retail Price.
[Amit Varma]: This is a price set by the manufacturer of a product above which a product may not be sold.
[Amit Varma]: What is the intention and the seen effect of this?
[Amit Varma]: The seen effect of a maximum retail price is that consumers are not cheated into paying excessively high prices by unscrupulous capitalists.
[Amit Varma]: So that's the seen effect of MRP.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing to note here is that while the existence of an MRP is mandated by the government,
[Amit Varma]: the actual price is set by manufacturers themselves.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not like the price caps set by the government that we have discussed in previous episodes,
[Amit Varma]: which inevitably lead to shortages.
[Amit Varma]: But even the MRP has unintended consequences and unseen effects.
[Amit Varma]: And to discuss them, I've invited a guest on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Prithviraj Mukherjee teaches marketing at IIM Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: And before he gets started on telling us about the unseen effects of MRP,
[Amit Varma]: there's an important social science funda that he'd like to talk about.
[Guest]: Yeah, thanks, Amit.
[Guest]: So what I'd like to start off with is by talking about the anchoring bias.
[Guest]: Now, some of you may have already read about this if you've read Nobel laureate Daniel Kahneman's book,
[Guest]: Thinking Fast and Slow.
[Guest]: It is a very powerful bias.
[Guest]: So let me just briefly explain in layman's language how this works.
[Guest]: So one of the experiments that they did is that you get, say, a hundred people
[Guest]: and randomly divide them into groups A and B.
[Guest]: And these experiments were done in America in different contexts.
[Guest]: So first, let me start with a non-price context.
[Guest]: So what these guys did was divide people into two groups, A and B.
[Guest]: Group A was asked, do you believe Gandhi died at the age of 40?
[Guest]: Group B was asked, do you believe Gandhi died at the age of 144?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Now, remember that these are American people, not that familiar with Gandhi,
[Guest]: but they've seen pictures of Gandhi.
[Guest]: They know that Gandhi was old.
[Guest]: So group A clearly knows that Gandhi did not die at the age of 40.
[Guest]: So almost all of them answer no, unless you're really ignorant, you answer no.
[Guest]: Group B knows that no human being has lived to 144.
[Guest]: So they also answer no.
[Guest]: So this is known as priming.
[Guest]: Essentially, these numbers are to prime you into a certain state of mind.
[Guest]: The next question they ask is, so at what age do you think Gandhi died?
[Guest]: Now, here's the interesting bit.
[Guest]: Group B, who were given a high number, gave an average death age of Gandhi
[Guest]: much higher than group A.
[Guest]: Now, remember that these groups were randomly assigned.
[Guest]: The numbers also make no sense, right?
[Guest]: So what the hypothesis was essentially is that even nonsensical numbers
[Guest]: can prime you to make value judgments, judgments about things
[Guest]: that we assumed previously that you would be rational about
[Guest]: or you would have some knowledge about.
[Guest]: Now, let's take this into a pricing context.
[Guest]: Instead of Gandhi's age, imagine I show you a Coke bottle and ask you,
[Guest]: would you pay 10 rupees for this Coke bottle?
[Guest]: You're used to paying 30 rupees, so you say yes.
[Guest]: Another group is asked, would you pay 100 rupees for this Coke bottle?
[Guest]: You know that this is absolutely high, so you say no.
[Guest]: And then I ask you, Coke bottle is a bad example
[Guest]: because you have internal references already and I'll explain that.
[Guest]: Imagine it's a new product, an artifact of some sort.
[Guest]: You think 10 rupees is cheap, 100 rupees is too high.
[Guest]: So in one case you say yes, in the other case you say no.
[Guest]: The next question is, so what's the maximum you'll pay?
[Guest]: Now you'll see that group A who was primed at 10 rupees
[Guest]: is going to give a much lower value to that maximum price
[Guest]: that they're willing to pay than the 100 rupee group.
[Guest]: So essentially what the inference is that you assume that people
[Guest]: know how to value things but they do not.
[Guest]: Now this has far-reaching implications because negotiations are based on anchoring.
[Guest]: Negotiations, things like, you know when,
[Guest]: what do you say when juries award some sort of compensation?
[Guest]: You see that people ask a really high number because
[Guest]: that's actually an attempt to anchor the jury into giving a higher number, etc.
[Guest]: If you're bargaining on something, etc.
[Guest]: You can see your shopkeeper intuitively knows that anchoring bias.
[Guest]: He's going to start at a high number, you start at a lower number
[Guest]: and then you start going back and forth.
[Guest]: So essentially this is the idea of anchoring.
[Guest]: Now Kahneman and Tversky showed that this can be done with pure random numbers.
[Guest]: Now this was a very very big deal.
[Guest]: Remember that neither Kahneman nor Tversky were economists
[Guest]: and their findings flew in the face of conventional economics
[Guest]: and the idea of the rational man, homo economicus.
[Guest]: And unfortunately Tversky died too early.
[Guest]: But a lot of work in this line finally led to the Nobel Prize that Daniel Kahneman got.
[Guest]: So now related to this idea is that, is the idea of reference price.
[Guest]: Let's go back to the pricing example.
[Guest]: So if you're used to paying a certain price over a period of time,
[Guest]: you kind of get used to it.
[Guest]: And this again kind of relates back to the anchoring bias.
[Guest]: And so you're happy when there's a discount
[Guest]: and you're disproportionately unhappy when the price increases.
[Guest]: So there have been studies to show that, yeah,
[Guest]: discounting marginally increases the demand.
[Guest]: But if you increase over a certain reference price that the customer is used to,
[Guest]: so essentially losses loom larger than gains,
[Guest]: which is actually the theory that got the Nobel Prize,
[Guest]: the prospect theory, which Kahneman and Tversky came up with.
[Guest]: So, yeah, you're not too sensitive to gains,
[Guest]: but you are disproportionately sensitive to losses.
[Guest]: Yeah, so with this basis in mind,
[Guest]: we can start talking about what maximum retail price is.
[Amit Varma]: Give me the history of the MRP.
[Amit Varma]: What is the purpose behind MRP?
[Amit Varma]: Why is India the only country that has it?
[Amit Varma]: And what is the intention behind it firstly?
[Guest]: Okay, so MRP means maximum retail price.
[Guest]: As far as I know, India is the only country right now that has it.
[Guest]: So there's a very nice article by Anupam Manohar in The Hindu of the Takshashila Institute.
[Guest]: So MRP was introduced in 1990 as a proposed measure
[Guest]: to safeguard consumers from unreasonably high prices.
[Guest]: It is not applicable to loose food grains or anything like that or services.
[Guest]: It is applicable to packaged goods, essentially branded goods, packaged goods, etc.
[Guest]: So Dawood Basmati can have an MRP, but loose Basmati cannot.
[Guest]: The idea being that you don't want a trader to charge unreasonably high prices,
[Guest]: especially given that in many places you have what is known as a local monopoly.
[Guest]: Even though there is competition, in a small village I might have a local monopoly
[Guest]: and I don't want you to start price gouging because of that.
[Guest]: So a Coca-Cola can, for example, has an MRP of 30 rupees, etc.
[Guest]: The company that packages the good is allowed to set its MRP,
[Guest]: but it has to print it on the packaging.
[Guest]: And then it is punishable by law to charge more than MRP.
[Amit Varma]: The retailer cannot charge more than MRP.
[Amit Varma]: What does the anchoring bias have to do with MRP?
[Guest]: So the anchoring bias comes in.
[Guest]: I explained about how people are primed with numbers, right?
[Guest]: So abroad, for example, let's say in the US or France where I was,
[Guest]: people are used to paying a certain price
[Guest]: and that kind of serves as the anchor or reference price in the long run.
[Guest]: In India, since the price is explicitly printed on the packaging,
[Guest]: it kind of serves as an anchor for you.
[Guest]: So your willingness to pay is kind of determined by the anchoring bias, by the MRP.
[Guest]: So you will be very sad if I go a little above MRP.
[Guest]: So you might have experienced this when you go to a shop
[Guest]: and the guy charges you more than the MRP.
[Guest]: You are typically not happy.
[Guest]: And you will be mildly happy when a discount is given on the MRP.
[Guest]: So that's the relation of the anchoring bias to MRP.
[Amit Varma]: And what are the unseen effects of the MRP?
[Amit Varma]: The seen effects is no price gouging and customers know what to expect
[Amit Varma]: and they don't get exploited.
[Amit Varma]: What are the unseen effects?
[Guest]: Yeah, so unseen effects can happen in many ways.
[Guest]: One of them is that especially in remote areas again,
[Guest]: so again let's take the example of a Coke bottle or say ice cream.
[Guest]: Now you need to deliver the goods to the shop first of all.
[Guest]: If you are in a remote area, the cost of that increases
[Guest]: and sometimes is borne by the retailer himself.
[Guest]: You might not have a reliable electricity connection
[Guest]: which you need for refrigeration of course.
[Guest]: So you might incur costs which do not make it economical
[Guest]: for you to sell at MRP anymore.
[Guest]: You might have to sell it at a price higher.
[Guest]: In which case either you do sell it at a higher price
[Guest]: which is often commonly observed
[Guest]: or if there is a strict enforcement of MRP,
[Guest]: you might end up not stocking certain goods.
[Guest]: So this could have effects on the retail shelves in remote areas.
[Amit Varma]: So effect one is essentially that because there is a price ceiling,
[Amit Varma]: if it's not economical for someone to sell it within the MRP,
[Amit Varma]: he doesn't sell it at all.
[Guest]: There is simply a shortage of...
[Guest]: At all or he breaks the law.
[Guest]: Or he breaks the law.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, if I take an ST bus and I'm near Kolhapur
[Amit Varma]: and I get down at a store
[Amit Varma]: and the cost for him of getting the Coke bottle there are so high
[Amit Varma]: that he cannot possibly sell it profitably at MRP.
[Amit Varma]: Either he's breaking the law and taking that risk
[Amit Varma]: or there's no Coke bottle for me at all.
[Guest]: Exactly. That's exactly the point.
[Guest]: So what the MRP is doing there
[Guest]: is actually interfering with free market dynamics.
[Guest]: So his profit maximizing price might be slightly higher.
[Guest]: Now remember, unlimited price gouging is not possible.
[Guest]: If this guy sells the Coke bottle at 100 or 200 rupees,
[Guest]: nobody is going to buy it.
[Guest]: But it might be economical for him to sell it at 35
[Guest]: instead of the printed MRP.
[Amit Varma]: And people would gladly buy it at that price.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: And you also need to drink a Coke, etc.
[Guest]: So that's the trade-off being made.
[Guest]: The other thing is that think about a city,
[Guest]: a crowded city area where there are hundreds of shops
[Guest]: next to each other, small panwala, etc.
[Guest]: Those guys actually benefit a lot
[Guest]: because the MRP actually gives a kind of signal
[Guest]: at what price you can charge.
[Guest]: And this guy can tell the customer,
[Guest]: look, I'm charging the MRP, I'm being fair.
[Guest]: If the MRP hadn't been there,
[Guest]: there might have been a price war
[Guest]: where all of these guys would have either killed each other
[Amit Varma]: or gone out of business.
[Amit Varma]: But the consumers would have benefited eventually
[Guest]: from lower prices, right?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So from the consumer's point of view,
[Guest]: I suspect that the average price being paid by consumers
[Guest]: is high now.
[Guest]: Because of the MRP?
[Guest]: Because of the MRP.
[Guest]: So your paying price is very close to the MRP.
[Guest]: So at best, your shopkeeper might reduce the Rs.30 price to Rs.28.
[Guest]: But the MRP is kind of like a fixed price
[Guest]: which prevents it from going down to Rs.20, Rs.15, Rs.10, etc.
[Guest]: So that each one trying to put the other out of business,
[Guest]: the price war, the spiral doesn't happen.
[Amit Varma]: So if the MRP wasn't there,
[Amit Varma]: and let's say you have a lot of soft drinks stores at a beach,
[Amit Varma]: and if the MRP wasn't there,
[Amit Varma]: you imagine they would compete
[Amit Varma]: and the customer would get a good price.
[Amit Varma]: But here the MRP effectively cartelizes
[Amit Varma]: in terms of what is actually happening.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: There is a third aspect.
[Guest]: There are actually four aspects that I'd like to discuss.
[Guest]: Aspect three is that,
[Guest]: you may have observed that if you go to McDonald's, Subway or Airport,
[Guest]: they advertise soft drinks, Pepsi, Coke, etc.
[Guest]: They do not put the price, but they put MRP.
[Guest]: And now, of course, you are lulled into thinking that these guys,
[Guest]: I'm at a posh place and I'm paying MRP perfectly fine,
[Guest]: you order the Coke, etc.
[Guest]: You'll be surprised to see that the same Coke bottle,
[Guest]: which costs you Rs.30 at the Paanwala store,
[Guest]: now has a printed price of Rs.60.
[Amit Varma]: So Coke is allowed to set different MRPs for different outlets?
[Guest]: Yes, and there will be a small print which says
[Guest]: this is only for certain outlets.
[Guest]: Now, there's a history to this, actually.
[Guest]: So MRP violation, of course, is very common.
[Guest]: And especially at airports, if you remember from, say,
[Guest]: eight or nine years ago,
[Guest]: you would see that MRP was being regularly violated.
[Guest]: The MRP was still Rs.30 and they were selling it at double, etc.
[Amit Varma]: Causing much middle class outrage.
[Guest]: Much middle class outrage, etc.
[Guest]: And this was blatant violation.
[Guest]: And the double MRPs didn't exist at that time.
[Guest]: So some tax officer was overcharged at Chennai airport,
[Guest]: and he got so angry that he ended up fining them Rs.80 lakhs, the shop.
[Guest]: And after this, of course, now it becomes unprofitable, as I said,
[Guest]: to sell at the airport because, you know, large licensing fees, etc. happened.
[Guest]: So the way to get around this was that brands decided,
[Guest]: and lobbied with the government, to have different MRPs.
[Guest]: One for the posh outlet and one for the common man.
[Guest]: I find this kind of hypocritical, in a way.
[Guest]: So again, this is my value judgment.
[Guest]: Because, see, you're allowed to sell below MRP at any point.
[Guest]: So I have no problem if somebody says Rs.60 or Rs.100 is the MRP.
[Guest]: But why not let even the small guy have the Rs.60 or Rs.100 MRP
[Guest]: and then let the free market dynamics play out.
[Guest]: So why should the guy in a remote place in Kolhapur still be forced to sell at Rs.30
[Guest]: when it's not economical for him.
[Guest]: But the airport guy, for the same reason, is allowed to jack up the price.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So having MRP for different segments is kind of farcical, in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: What's the effect of this?
[Amit Varma]: That, you know, the airport has a higher MRP on the consumer, for example.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I can tell you from personal experience and a few other people.
[Guest]: So before, I also used to see that the airport would say Coke Rs.60, which was illegal,
[Guest]: and I would end up not buying.
[Guest]: Recently what happened was once I went to a vending machine and
[Guest]: not vending machine, sorry, one of those outlets at the airport,
[Guest]: and it said Pepsi MRP, and this was like about five years ago.
[Guest]: I was very happy. MRP, right? Let's buy it.
[Guest]: So I buy it, and then I'm charged Rs.60.
[Guest]: And I tell this guy, what the hell?
[Guest]: And he says, look at the printed price. I'm charging you MRP.
[Guest]: And I was only MRP.
[Guest]: So, yeah, so it brings about a false sense of security, if I may say,
[Guest]: that you are being charged a fair price.
[Guest]: In my case, I actually took a look and then realized that this is the difference.
[Guest]: But imagine you're having a large meal.
[Guest]: Let's say you're a family of four, and you have four pizzas and four Cokes,
[Guest]: for example, and this could happen at your Pizza Hut, Subway, etc.
[Guest]: You see MRP, and then you don't really take a look at the bill, right?
[Guest]: You assume that there are taxes, this, that, etc.
[Guest]: And you don't really see that you're actually paying double the amount.
[Guest]: So the guy charging Rs.35 on a Rs.30 MRP right next door to the McDonald's
[Guest]: can pay a huge fine for breaking the law,
[Guest]: while this guy here can coolly charge you Rs.60.
[Amit Varma]: And the consumer doesn't even realize it because the term MRP is like a signal of reasonableness.
[Guest]: He can then relax and not...
[Guest]: Either that or the consumer himself justifies to himself that Subway is somehow a higher place or a better place.
[Guest]: So it seems reasonable, but actually it isn't.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So we have three effects so far.
[Amit Varma]: Effect one is that there can be shortages because of the price ceiling.
[Amit Varma]: Effect two is that consumers, often if competition was allowed to play out,
[Amit Varma]: would get lower prices and therefore they are suffering.
[Amit Varma]: Effect three is that consumers can be lulled into a false sense of security
[Amit Varma]: because MRP is in that sense a signal for reasonableness for most of the middle class and they trust it implicitly.
[Guest]: Exactly. So what happens is, so to add to your point,
[Guest]: just go to your nearest McDonald's, Subway or airport the next time and see the board.
[Guest]: You will see Pepsi MRP. You will never see Pepsi Rs.60.
[Guest]: They will always tell you that we are selling soft drinks at MRP.
[Guest]: The word MRP will be written.
[Guest]: So yeah, so this is essentially to lull you into the false sense of security.
[Amit Varma]: Something to watch out for, especially in days where cash is hard to come by.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: What is the fourth unseen effect you want to tell us about?
[Guest]: The fourth unseen effect, again, so remember that we have discounts on online retail.
[Guest]: So in places like US, if I tell you that there is a 40% discount,
[Guest]: it does not have that much information value simply because there is no published price.
[Guest]: So people may say there is a 40% discount on the average price or the last price or something like that.
[Guest]: But there isn't that much of information value as there is in India simply because an MRP is published.
[Guest]: So you can very clearly say that I am giving you a 40% discount on MRP.
[Guest]: So one artifact could be that companies themselves are inflating their MRPs.
[Guest]: So I could inflate the price of a cell phone to be Rs.20,000
[Guest]: and then say I am giving you a 50% discount on Flipkart and selling for Rs.10,000.
[Guest]: Of course, they are still making profits.
[Guest]: I hope the company is. It's a different matter that Flipkart may not be.
[Guest]: So this again has some peculiar implications.
[Guest]: You can see it in garments, retail, etc.
[Guest]: I don't know about you, but I don't buy clothes unless there is a minimum 30% discount
[Guest]: or buy one, get one free or something like that.
[Guest]: So in marketing terminology, this is called deal proneness.
[Guest]: So you become so used to deals, so your reference price is no more Rs.1,000 for a T-shirt,
[Guest]: but it's Rs.1,000 minus 30%, Rs.700.
[Guest]: So these discounts on MRP are actually kind of making you deal prone and lowering your references.
[Guest]: So what's wrong with being deal prone?
[Guest]: From the consumer perspective, nothing.
[Guest]: From the retailer perspective, it erodes brand value, especially higher brands.
[Guest]: If you see luxury brands, never give deals, price deals at least.
[Guest]: Once you start giving deals, you'll always have to give deals and there is no way up.
[Guest]: What's the role of MRP in this?
[Guest]: The role of MRP is that the deal is actually based on the MRP.
[Guest]: So if you haven't been clever enough to inflate the MRP to a really high value,
[Guest]: you could end up losing.
[Guest]: The second thing is, yeah, deal proneness is not good for your brand value at all.
[Guest]: So I don't know about other people, but you see Flipkart giving a deal every day
[Guest]: and come on, it's not really a very good signal of a credible brand.
[Amit Varma]: And would it be correct to say that these wild discounts that we get,
[Amit Varma]: these discount wars that happen on the online stores,
[Amit Varma]: would not happen if there was no MRP because the market would be competitive
[Amit Varma]: and the prices would be much lower anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So in percentage terms, you would not be giving such high discounts.
[Guest]: I would tend to agree with you.
[Guest]: Of course, there needs to be more validation done on this.
[Guest]: But yes, so if market dynamics were allowed to play out,
[Guest]: we might have just seen prices being compared instead of deals being compared.
[Guest]: So instead of going to X with 40% versus Y with 30%,
[Guest]: I would go to X with 60 rupees versus Y with 70 rupees
[Guest]: and do a price to price comparison.
[Guest]: Again, so when I was abroad, let's say for air tickets, for example,
[Guest]: I would look at absolute price and I still do.
[Guest]: But here I see that apps, shopping apps, etc.,
[Guest]: they show you the percentage values rather than absolute.
[Amit Varma]: And because we are so anchored to the MRP, these deals look very juicy to us.
[Guest]: They look very juicy to us, exactly.
[Guest]: So a 10,000 rupee phone looks over 20,000 rupees,
[Guest]: looks much juicier than 10,000 rupees over 12,000 rupees, right?
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much. Very illuminating talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. Thank you, Mayanna.
[Amit Varma]: So there you have it.
[Amit Varma]: While the MRP is a good intention measure meant to protect the consumer,
[Amit Varma]: its unseen effect might actually be the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: It ends up harming the consumer.
[Amit Varma]: It is in fact my case that pretty much all interventions in a free market
[Amit Varma]: end up harming consumers.
[Amit Varma]: This is a theme I'll keep exploring in detail as the weeks go by.
[Amit Varma]: But for now, thank you for listening to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Scene and the Unseen,
[Unknown]: Amit Verma talks to Shruti Raj Gopalan about Uber surge pricing.
[Amit Varma]: For more, go to sceneunseen.in.
[Unknown]: You can also find us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Thanks, man. I'm going to check you out.